---
author: nieve
title:  Piped
tags: internal-news
---
Since this is a blog I guess I can talk about whatever I want. 

Ahem... Today I am pleased to announce our newest construction, Piped! You can find it at [https://piped.agew.tech/](https://piped.agew.tech/). I like watching youtube content, and individious had a few too many problems, so when I discovered piped I was finally able to eliminate all google cookies from my browser. Naturally, this was one of the first instances I wanted to host. Enjoy!

Setting it up was actually extremely simple; the configuration file was intuitive to work with and then I just needed to run a single docker compose command. What was not easy was editing the code. I couldn't find any instructions on how to modify my instance and the docker container may as well have been an black box. So then I mastered the art of astral projection and posessed a version of vscode running inside container, but all I found was an ocean of empty folders and unreadable binary files. Eventually I ditched the idea of docker and decided to just download the code and run it manually. I noticed the `package.json` file so I tried `npm install` `npm run dev` and it actually worked! The website used Vue and something resembling tailwind (Unocss?). I got to work and added a few features I wanted such as showing youtube chapters. But now I don't know what to do with it... I made some pull requests and I hope they accept it soon or else I'm going to have to learn how to make my own docker images 😦.

So it turns out that my premium discord theme is actually better than the one on discord. As usual for software, the unofficial "fake" version/pirated copy/open source alternative is better than the real thing. In this case, you can choose different themes for light and dark mode, something discord could easily have allowed but didn't bother to. The thing about css is that it is all run locally and you can change it however you like. It's like in The Matrix when all your worldly posessions are just whatever the computer decides to show you, and they don't inherently require any real life resources to show more or less of them, so you can bend reality to your will. For fun I added a new rainbow gradient to the list of background colors. Happy pride month, everyone!

