---
title: it's time for higher framerates in films
tags: discussion
comments: https://matrix.to/#/!MYnIXfdNoeowBWxAvO:matrix.org/$D66ez3KVYiTCmRQ3jUgjzYFSqCyjQP-7tajZyaVuA3E?via=matrix.org&via=envs.net
---

Pretty much every movie and series is shot at 24 frames per second (approximately). I think it's time we move to higher framerates.

## Why

If the resolution of a video is low, it appears blurry. The same goes for frame rate.

Suppose there is a video of an object at 24 fps. In the time between the frames, the object could have moved elsewhere. If the object doesn't move or stays near its original position (for example, someone's mouth as they talk), then it's not a big problem. But if the object is travelling in a single direction at a moderate speed of 500 pixels/second, then before the next frame is shown, the object will 500/24=20.8 pixels away. In other words, the picture you see will appear to be up to 20 pixels away from where you expect it to be before snapping into the correct position and then drifting 20 pixels away again, 24 times every second. Blurbusters made a good explanation of this phenomenon [here](https://blurbusters.com/faq/oled-motion-blur/).

<video controls loop src="/assets/images/afsdeawf.webm"></video>

For example, if you follow the dvd logo in this video with your eyes you will see this:

<video controls loop src="/assets/images/ophacfuemw2.mp4"></video>

This jittering effect is especially noticeable when the camera is panning and the whole scene to moves, making it hard to see anything.

Now that it's 2024 and we have modern technology, I wish movies would be available in higher framerates. Unfortunately, most people actually PREFER a low framerate for reasons that are hard the empathise with.

> Motion blur is intentional 

Movies can have motion blur added to give a sense of movement. But this blurring is often not enough to bridge the gaps between frames, so the object would still appear to be jittering unnaturally. In addition, this jittering is also present in scenes where motion blur is not intended, such as when camera slowly pans across a beautiful landscape.

> What about the soap opera effect

I don't know what that is. Actually, I've never seen a soap opera before. But like, we don't see films being shot in black and white today just because progamerxxx's roblox videos are recorded in color.

> High framerate videos are too realistic and don't feel like movies anymore

Today, many people pay for surround sound systems, OLED televisions, and other expensive technology to make the movie feel as realistic/immersive as possible. These movies look very different from the first black and white silent films, unless somebody decides to intentionally add film artifacts, flickering, etc to create that feeling.

Finally, it's easy to convert high framerate video to a lower framerate, not so much the other way around. You can use [frame generation with mpv](https://github.com/hooke007/MPV_lazy) but requires a very powerful graphics card and the results aren't great.

> Can we use backlight strobing?

Unfortunately 24hz is just too low. The strobing would be very noticeable and uncomfortable. Also, it would reduce brightness.

What do you think? Are you fine with 24fps or is it noticeable to you? Let us discuss.
