---
date: 9999-01-01
title: it's time for higher framerates (in films)
tags: discussion
---

Pretty much every movie and series is shot at 24 frames per second (approximately), which I don't like. I usually upscale the movies I watch to 48 fps.

## Why

If the resolution of a video is low, it appears blurry. The same goes for frame rate.

Suppose there is a video of an object at 24 fps. In the time between the frames, the object could have moved elsewhere. If the object doesn't move or stays near its original position (for example, someone's mouth as they talk), then it's not a big problem. But if the object is travelling in a single direction at a moderate speed of 500 pixels/second, then before the next frame is shown, the object will 500/24=20.8 pixels away. In other words, the picture you see will appear to be up to 20 pixels away from where you expect it to be before snapping into the correct position and then drifting 20 pixels away again, 24 times every second. Blurbusters made a good explanation of this phenomenon [here](https://blurbusters.com/faq/oled-motion-blur/).

<video controls loop src="/assets/images/afsdeawf.webm"></video>

For example, if you follow the dvd logo in this video with your eyes you will see this:

<video controls loop src="/assets/images/ophacfuemw2.mp4"></video>


This jittering effect is especially noticeable when the camera is panning and the whole scene to moves, making it hard to see anything.

Now that it's 2024 and we have modern technology, I wish movies would be available in higher framerates. Unfortunately, most people actually PREFER a low framerate for reasons that are hard the empathise with.

> Motion blur is intentional 

Movies can have motion blur added to give a sense of movement. But this blurring is often not enough to bridge the gaps between frames, so the object would still appear to be jittering unnaturally. In addition, this jittering is also present in scenes where motion blur is not intended, such as when camera slowly pans across a beautiful landscape.

> What about the soap opera effect

I don't know what that is. Actually, I've never seen a soap opera before.

> High framerate videos are too realistic and don't feel like movies anymore

Today, many people pay for surround sound systems, OLED televisions, and other expensive technology to make the movie feel as realistic/immersive as possible. These movies look very different from the first black and white silent films, unless somebody decides to intentionally add film artifacts, flickering, etc to create that feeling.

Also, if you don't like it, it's very easy to convert high framerate video to a lower framerate.

> Can we use backlight strobing?

It would probably be very noticeable and quite uncomfortable. Unfortunately 24hz is just too low. Also, it would reduce brightness.

Speaking of strobing...

If you ever decided the world had too much of a "soap opera effect", then come to my school, where the ugly overhead lighting cycles on and off with every pulse of the grid. Now you can experience reality at 50hz! What's an inductor? We don't use those around here, wouldn't want your life to be too lifelike!

## How to upscale your film/show/anime using frame generation

You can use frame generation/interpolation to upscale your videos and make movement appear more smooth. It's not ideal but having some intermediate frame is better than nothing, for me at least.

Requirements
- A computer connected to a monitor/TV. Not some garbage on a smart TV.
- The video as a playable file. Not some streaming service that only lets you access videos in their proprietary app.
- A powerful graphics card from Nvidia.
  - Nvidia 3060 is more than enough for 1080p resolution. 3080 or stronger is needed for watching 4k videos on a 1440p monitor. For 4k video on a 4k monitor, you will need 4080 or above.
  - Sadly, AMD cards will be about 1.5x weaker than you'd normally expect relative to nvidia due to software support. Also, I don't know to set it up, you'll have to look on the [github repository](https://github.com/AmusementClub/vs-mlrt)
- Windows operating system. There might be a way on linux but I couldn't find clear instructions on github ☹
- Basic knowledge of the following
  - MPV, the [best](https://thewiki.moe/guides/playback/) video player (it's free).
  - [Python](https://www.python.org/) and [vapoursynth](https://pypi.org/project/VapourSynth/#files).

Instructions
1. Download `VSTRT-Windows-x64` from [here](https://github.com/AmusementClub/vs-mlrt/releases/tag/v15.2).
2. Extract the archive to your [vapoursynth plugins directory](https://www.vapoursynth.com/doc/installation.html#plugin-autoloading)
3. Store the following code as file somewhere and name it `rife-upscale.vpy`:
{% highlight python %}

import vapoursynth as vs
import sys
sys.path.append("C:\Program Files\VapourSynth\plugins")
from vsmlrt import RIFE, RIFEModel, Backend

core = vs.core
clip = video_in

upscaleFactor=2
widescreenAspectRatio=False
screenHeight=1440
screenWidth=2560

dst_fps = container_fps*upscaleFactor

print(clip.format.id)
print(container_fps,dst_fps,display_fps)

if widescreenAspectRatio:
    crop=clip.height*(1080-816)/2/1080
    clip=vs.core.std.Crop(clip,top=crop,bottom=crop)

if dst_fps<=display_fps:
    fmt_fin = clip.format.id
    colorlv = clip.get_frame(0).props._ColorRange
    resize_scale=1
    resize_scale=max(clip.width/screenWidth,clip.height/screenHeight)
    if resize_scale>1:
        clip = vs.core.resize.Bicubic(clip, format=vs.RGBH, matrix_in_s='709',width=clip.width/resize_scale,height=clip.height/resize_scale)
    else:
        clip = vs.core.resize.Bicubic(clip, format=vs.RGBH, matrix_in_s='709')

    scale=1 #doesnt improve performance for some reason
    blockSize=32/scale
    paddingX=(blockSize-clip.width%blockSize)%blockSize
    paddingY=(blockSize-clip.height%blockSize)%blockSize
    clip=vs.core.std.AddBorders(clip,left=paddingX,top=paddingY)
    #print(clip.width,clip.height)

    clip = RIFE(clip, model=RIFEModel.v4_4, multi=upscaleFactor, scale=scale, backend=Backend.TRT(fp16=True, num_streams=2))

    clip=vs.core.std.Crop(clip,left=paddingX,top=paddingY)
    clip=vs.core.resize.Bicubic(clip,format=fmt_fin, matrix_s="709", range=1 if colorlv==0 else None)

clip.set_output()

{% endhighlight%}

4. In the file, change `screenHeight` and `screenWidth` to be the resolution of your display. Also, make sure the path in `sys.path.append` is your vapoursynth plugin directory.

5. `upscaleFactor` is set to 2, meaning it will double the framerate from 24 to 48. You can set it higher if you want and your graphics card is strong enough.

6. In your `input.conf` file for mpv, add this line: `KEYBIND vf toggle vapoursynth="PATH/rife-upscale.vpy"`. Replace `PATH` with the location of your `rife-upscale.vpy` file. Replace `KEYBIND` with whatever key you want to press to enable frame interpolation.

7. Open your video in mpv and press the keybind you chose.

